 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

A Guide for Business Start-up 

 

Special thanks to Tri-County Community College Small Business Center, Murphy, NC 
www.tricountycc.edu 

Overview to the Development of a Business Plan 

 
 
A  business  plan  is  more  than  a  means  to  an  end.    Most  likely  the  reason  you  are 
reading this is that you need a business plan to obtain capital for your business and that 
you are either pursuing equity participation or are applying for a loan.  If this is the case, 
then a business plan will be both essential and critical for your endeavor.  If financial 
support is the only reason you are preparing a business plan, then you are making a 
grave mistake. 
 
Most business start-ups fail within three years.  They fail for two reasons.  The first is 
that the business has insufficient capital to operate until cash flow can pay expenses 
and generate an operating profit.  The second is due to poor management.  A business 
plan is the first line of defense to make sure that your business does not succumb due 
to  these  two  reasons.    A  good  business  plan  is  a  road  map,  showing  where  your 
business  is  going,  how  it  proposes  to  get  there,  and  the  resources  needed  for  the 
journey.  As such it can also alert you if the business begins to run off-course, allowing 
you ample time to take appropriate action.  Finally, you also need to understand how 
your  business  will  be  evaluated  and  judged  as  a  business  especially  when  you  need 
services or access to capital. 
 
The  purpose  of  this  handbook  is  to  act  as  a  self-directing  guide  to  enable  you  to 
properly  and  correctly  develop  your  own  business  plan.    The  SBCN  hopes  that  this 
guide will be of assistance to you in completing your plan and securing the capital for 
your business. 
 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 2 

The Cover Sheet 

 

The cover sheet is the first page of the proposal.  It identifies the: 

 

(cid:131)  Name, address and telephone number of the business 
(cid:131)  Name, address and telephone number of the owners 
(cid:131)  Date of the proposal or loan request 
(cid:131) 
 

Identifies who prepared the plan, if not the owner 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 3 

Table of Contents 

 

Table of Contents……………………………..………………………….…………….. Page 4 

Executive Summary……………………………………………………………………..Page 5 

General Company Description…………………………………………………………Page 7 

Products and Services…………………………………………………….…………….Page 9 

Marketing Plan………………………………………………………………………..…Page 10 

Operational Plan………………………………………………………………………..Page 17 

Management and Organization……………………………………………………….Page 21 

Personal Financial Statement………………………………………………………....Page 22 

Startup Expenses and Capitalization…………………………………………………Page 23 

Financial Plan…………………………………………………………………………...Page 24 

Appendices………………………………………………………………………………Page 27 

Refining the Plan………………………………………………………………………..Page 28 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 4 

Executive Summary 

 
Write this section last. 
 
It is suggested that you make it two pages or fewer. 
 
Include everything that you would cover in a five-minute interview. 
 
Explain the fundamentals of the proposed business:  What will your product be? Who 
will your customers be? Who are the owners? What do you think the future holds for 
your business and your industry? 
 
Make it enthusiastic, professional, complete, and concise. 
 
If applying for a loan, state clearly how much you want, precisely how you are going to 
use it, and how the money will make your business more profitable, thereby ensuring 
repayment. 
 
The Executive Summary explains the purpose of this proposal.  It should include a very 
brief  summary  of  the  business  as  an  introduction.    Then  it  should  include  the  basic 
points  of  the  financing  proposal.    This  section  is  frequently  written  last  and  can  be 
modified for different presentations.  The Statement is sometimes called an Executive 
Summary and should include: 
 

1.  What is the business?  What are its objectives? 

2.  How  is  the  business  structured  or  organized  (single  proprietor,  partnership, 

corporation, limited liability company)? 

3.  Who are the principals involved in the business? 

4.  Why will the venture be successful? 

5.  What is the total amount of funding needed to implement the plans? 

6.  How will the funds benefit the business? 

7.  How much of the funds are being requested from this funding source?  At what 

terms (interest, payment rate, time)?  What is the ‘deal’ offered? 

8.  What other sources of funding are being considered? 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 5 

9.  How will the funds be repaid? 

10. Why does the loan or investment make sense? 

11. What are the critical risks and assumptions for this venture?  What strategies are 

planned to overcome these risks? 

 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 6 

General Company Description 

 
What business will you be in? What will you do? 
 
Mission  Statement:  Many  companies  have  a  brief  mission  statement,  usually  in  30 
words or fewer, explaining their reason for being and their guiding principles. If you want 
to draft a mission statement, this is a good place to put it in the plan, followed by: 
 
Company  Goals  and  Objectives:  Goals  are  destinations—where  you  want  your 
business to be. Objectives are progress markers along the way to goal achievement. 
For example, a goal might be to have a healthy, successful company that is a leader in 
customer service and that has a loyal customer following. Objectives might be annual 
sales targets and some specific measures of customer satisfaction. 
 
Business Philosophy: What is important to you in business? 
 
To  whom  will  you  market  your  products?  (State  it  briefly  here—you  will  do  a  more 
thorough explanation in the Marketing Plan section). 
 
Describe your industry.  Is it a growth industry? What changes do you foresee in the 
industry, short term and long term? How will your company be poised to take advantage 
of them? 
 
Describe your most important company strengths and core competencies. What factors 
will make the company succeed? What do you think your major competitive strengths 
will be? What background experience, skills, and strengths do you personally bring to 
this new venture? 
 
The  Description  of  the  Business  should  enable  a  reader  to  become  familiar  with  the 
business including gaining a detailed understanding of the product and/or service that 
will  be  provided.    Remember  to  explain  what  the  product  and/or  service  does  for 
customers, as all successful businesses are customer-driven. 
 
The  goals  and  objectives  of  the  business  should  be  indicated  and,  if  an  existing 
business, a summary of the history of the business should be included.  Some of the 
key questions that need to be addressed are: 
 

1.  What type of business is this (retail, wholesale, service, or manufacturing)? 
2.  Is the business a start-up, an expansion of an existing business, or the take-over 

(acquisition) of an existing business? 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 7 

3.  What 

is 

legal  structure 

the  business’s 

(proprietorship,  partnership,  or 
corporation)?  Why have you selected this form?  Summarize the ownership of 
the business, and any previous capitalization (share outstanding, management’s 
investment of cash/property?   

4.  When did (will) the business open?  What is the schedule of operation?  (Hours 
the store is open, days of the week, production schedule, and special seasonal 
considerations.) 

5.  Describe  materials  and  supply  sources,  methods  of  production,  merchandising 

strategy or how orders are received. 

6.  What will be special/unique about your business? 

 
For a new business or new business owners: 
What experience do you have in this industry? 
What do you know about the business, and what is the source of your knowledge? 
 
In a take-over situation, additional questions must be answered: 
Why are the owners selling the business? 
How was the purchase price established? 
What has been the sales trend?  How can you make sales more profitable? 
 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 8 

Products and Services 

Describe in depth your products or services (technical specifications, drawings, photos, 
sales brochures, and other bulky items belong in Appendices). 

What factors will give you competitive advantages or disadvantages? Examples include 
level of quality or unique or proprietary features. 

What are the pricing, fee, or leasing structures of your products or services? 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 9 

Marketing Plan 

libraries, 

in  public 

is  available 

Market research - Why? 
 
No matter how good your product and your service, the venture cannot succeed without 
effective  marketing.  And  this  begins  with  careful,  systematic  research.  It  is  very 
dangerous to assume that you already know about your intended market. You need to 
do market research to make sure you’re on track. Use the business planning process as 
your opportunity to uncover data and to question your marketing efforts. Your time will 
be well spent. 
 
Market research - How? 
 
There are two kinds of market research: primary and secondary. 
 
Secondary research means using published information such as industry profiles, trade 
journals, newspapers, magazines, census data, and demographic profiles. This type of 
information 
industry  associations,  chambers  of 
commerce, from vendors who sell to your industry, and from government agencies. 
 
Start  with  your  local  library.  Most  librarians  are  pleased  to  guide  you  through  their 
business data collection. You will be amazed at what is there. There are more online 
sources than you could possibly use. Your chamber of commerce has good information 
on  the  local  area.  Trade  associations  and  trade  publications  often  have  excellent 
industry-specific data. 
 
Primary research means gathering your own data. For example, you could do your own 
traffic count at a proposed location, use the yellow pages to identify competitors, and do 
surveys or focus-group interviews to learn about consumer preferences.  Professional 
market research can be very costly, but there are many books that show small business 
owners how to do effective research themselves. 
 
In  your  marketing  plan,  be  as  specific  as  possible;  give  statistics,  numbers,  and 
sources.  The  marketing  plan  will  be  the  basis,  later  on,  of  the  all-important  sales 
projection. 
 
Economics 
 
Facts about your industry: 

•  What is the total size of your market? 
•  What  percent  share  of  the market will you have? (This is important only if you 

think you will be a major factor in the market.) 

•  Current demand in target market. 

Page 10 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

•  Trends  in  target  market—growth  trends,  trends  in  consumer  preferences,  and 

trends in product development. 

•  Growth potential and opportunity for a business of your size. 
•  What  barriers  to  entry  do  you  face  in  entering  this  market  with  your  new 

company? Some typical barriers are: 

o  High capital costs 
o  High production costs 
o  High marketing costs 
o  Consumer acceptance and brand recognition 
o  Training and skills 
o  Unique technology and patents 
o  Unions 
o  Shipping costs 
o  Tariff barriers and quotas 

•  And of course, how will you overcome the barriers? 
•  How could the following affect your company? 

o  Change in technology 
o  Change in government regulations 
o  Change in the economy 
o  Change in your industry 

 

Product 
 
In the Products and Services section, you described your products and services as you 
see them. Now describe them from your customers’ point of view. 
 
Features and Benefits 
 
List all of your major products or services. 
 
For each product or service: 

•  Describe the most important features. What is special about it? 
•  Describe the benefits. That is, what will the product do for the customer? 

 
Note the difference between features and benefits, and think about them. For example, 
a house that gives shelter and lasts a long time is made with certain materials and to a 
certain design; those are its features. Its benefits include pride of ownership, financial 
security,  providing  for  the  family,  and  inclusion  in  a  neighborhood.  You  build  features 
into your product so that you can sell the benefits. 
 
What after-sale services will you give? Some examples are delivery, warranty, service 
contracts, support, follow-up, and refund policy. 
 

Page 11 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Customers 
 
Identify  your  targeted  customers,  their  characteristics,  and  their  geographic  locations, 
otherwise known as their demographics. 
 
The  description  will  be  completely  different  depending  on  whether  you  plan  to  sell  to 
other  businesses  or  directly  to  consumers.  If  you  sell  a  consumer  product,  but  sell  it 
through a channel of distributors, wholesalers, and retailers, you must carefully analyze 
both the end consumer and the middleman businesses to which you sell. 
 
You  may  have  more  than  one  customer  group.  Identify  the  most  important  groups.  
Then, for each customer group, construct what is called a demographic profile: 

Income level 

•  Age 
•  Gender 
•  Location 
• 
•  Social class and occupation 
•  Education 
•  Other (specific to your industry) 
•  Other (specific to your industry) 

 
For business customers, the demographic factors might be: 

Industry (or portion of an industry) 

• 
•  Location 
•  Size of firm 
•  Quality, technology, and price preferences 
•  Other (specific to your industry) 
•  Other (specific to your industry) 

 
Competition 
 
What products and companies will compete with you? 
List your major competitors: 
(Names and addresses) 
 
Will  they  compete  with  you  across  the  board,  or  just  for  certain  products,  certain 
customers, or in certain locations? 
 
Will you have important indirect competitors? (For example, video rental stores compete 
with theaters, although they are different types of businesses.) 
 
How will your products or services compare with the competition? 
 

Page 12 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Use the Competitive Analysis table below to compare your company with your two most 
important competitors. In the first column are key competitive factors. Since these vary 
from one industry to another, you may want to customize the list of factors. 
 
In the column labeled Me, state how you honestly think you will stack up in customers' 
minds. Then check whether you think this factor will be a strength or a weakness for 
you. Sometimes it is hard to analyze our own weaknesses. Try to be very honest here. 
Better  yet,  get  some  disinterested  strangers  to  assess  you.  This  can  be  a  real  eye-
opener. And remember that you cannot be all things to all people. In fact, trying to be 
causes many business failures because efforts become scattered and diluted. You want 
an honest assessment of your firm's strong and weak points. 
 
Now analyze each major competitor. In a few words, state how you think they compare. 
 
In the final column, estimate the importance of each competitive factor to the customer.  
1 = critical; 5 = not very important. 
Table 1: Competitive Analysis 

Factor 

Me 

Strength  Weakness Competitor A 

Competitor B 

Importance to 
Customer 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Products 

Price 

Quality 

Selection 

Service 

Reliability 

Stability 

Expertise 

Company 
Reputation 

Location 

Appearance 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 13 

Factor 

Me 

Strength  Weakness Competitor A 

Competitor B 

Importance to 
Customer 

Sales Method 

Credit 
Policies 

Advertising 

Image 

  

  

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Now, write a short paragraph stating your competitive advantages and disadvantages. 
 
Competition  should  be  recognized  and  analyzed  to  understand  their  strengths  and 
weaknesses and how this may affect your share of the market.  Most small businesses 
will not create additional demand for a particular good or service.  They obtain sales by 
attracting customers from existing businesses in the same market.  Be honest in your 
analysis and do not neglect consideration of indirect competition or alternative uses of 
the  customers’  limited  dollars.    You  should  clarify  your  reasons  for  believing  that 
potential  customers  will  choose  to  spend  their  money  at  your  business  instead  of 
elsewhere. 
 
Some key questions that should be asked are: 
 

1.  Who  are  the  five  closest  competitors?    Where  are  they  located  in  relation  to 

you?  Are there any potential new competitors? 

2.  How is their business?  Steady?  Increasing?  Decreasing? 
3.  What are their strengths, weaknesses, and resources?  How do you compare 

to them on these same factors? 

4.  How will competitors react to your entry? 
5.  What have you learned from their operation? 

 
Niche 
Now that you have systematically analyzed your industry, your product, your customers, 
and the competition, you should have a clear picture of where your company fits into the 
world. 

In one short paragraph, define your niche, your unique corner of the market. 

Page 14 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Strategy 
Now outline a marketing strategy that is consistent with your niche. 

Promotion 

1.  How will you get the word out to customers? 

2.  Advertising:  What  media,  why,  and  how  often?  Why  this  mix  and  not  some 

other? 

3.  Have you identified low-cost methods to get the most out of your promotional 

budget? 

4.  Will  you  use  methods  other  than  paid  advertising,  such  as  trade  shows, 
catalogs,  dealer  incentives,  word  of  mouth  (how  will  you  stimulate  it?),  and 
network of friends or professionals? 

5.  What image do you want to project? How do you want customers to see you? 

6.  In addition to advertising, what plans do you have for graphic image support? 
This includes things like logo design, cards and letterhead, brochures, signage, 
and interior design (if customers come to your place of business). 

7.  Should you have a system to identify repeat customers and then systematically 

contact them? 

Promotional Budget 

1.  How much will you spend on the items listed above? 

2.  Before startup? (These numbers will go into your startup budget.) 

3.  Ongoing? (These numbers will go into your operating plan budget.) 

Pricing 

1.  Explain  your  method  or  methods  of  setting  prices.  For  most  small  businesses, 
having the lowest price is not a good policy. It robs you of needed profit margin; 
customers may not care as much about price as you think; and large competitors 
can under price you anyway. Usually you will do better to have average prices 
and compete on quality and service.  

2.  Does  your  pricing  strategy  fit  with  what  was  revealed  in  your  competitive 

3.  Compare your prices with those of the competition. Are they higher, lower, the 

Page 15 

analysis? 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

same? Why? 

 

4.  How  important  is  price  as  a  competitive  factor?  Do  your  intended  customers 

really make their purchase decisions mostly on price? 

5.  What will be your customer service and credit policies? 

Proposed Location 

Probably  you  do  not  have  a  precise  location  picked  out  yet.  This  is  the  time  to  think 
about what you want and need in a location. Many startups run successfully from home 
for a while. 

You  will  describe  your  physical  needs  later,  in  the  Operational  Plan  section.  Here, 
analyze your location criteria as they will affect your customers. 

1.  Is your location important to your customers? If yes, how? 

2.  If customers come to your place of business: 

3.  Is it convenient? Parking? Interior spaces? Not out of the way? 

4.  Is it consistent with your image? 

5.  Is it what customers want and expect? 

6.  Where is the competition located? Is it better for you to be near them (like car 

dealers or fast food restaurants) or distant (like convenience food stores)? 

Distribution Channels 

1.  How do you sell your products or services? 

2.  Retail 

3.  Direct (mail order, Web, catalog) 

4.  Wholesale 

5.  Your own sales force 

6.  Agents 

7.  Independent representatives 

8.  Bid on contracts 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 16 

Operational Plan 

Explain the daily operation of the business, its location, equipment, people, processes, 
and surrounding environment. 
Production 

1.  How and where are your products or services produced? 

 
Explain your methods of: 

•  Production techniques and costs 
•  Quality control 
•  Customer service 
• 
Inventory control 
•  Product development 
 

Location 

have. 

 
Physical requirements: 
•  Amount of space 
•  Type of building 
•  Zoning 
•  Power and other utilities 

1.  What  qualities  do  you  need  in  a  location?  Describe  the  type  of  location  you’ll 

2.  Access: 

3.  Is it important that your location be convenient to transportation or to suppliers? 

4.  Do you need easy walk-in access? 

5.  What  are  your  requirements  for  parking  and  proximity  to  freeway,  airports, 

railroads, and shipping centers? 

6.  Include a drawing or layout of your proposed facility if it is important, as it might 

be for a manufacturer. 

7.  Construction? Most new companies should not sink capital into construction, but 
if  you  are  planning  to  build,  costs  and  specifications  will  be  a  big  part  of  your 
plan. 

8.  Cost:  Estimate  your  occupation  expenses,  including  rent,  but  also  including 
maintenance, utilities, insurance, and initial remodeling costs to make the space 
suit your needs. These numbers will become part of your financial plan. 

Page 17 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

 

9.  What will be your business hours? 

Legal Environment 
Describe the following: 

•  Licensing and bonding requirements 
•  Permits 
•  Health, workplace, or environmental regulations 
•  Special regulations covering your industry or profession 
•  Zoning or building code requirements 
• 
•  Trademarks, copyrights, or patents (pending, existing, or purchased) 

Insurance coverage 

Personnel 

•  Number of employees 
•  Type of labor (skilled, unskilled, and professional) 
•  Where and how will you find the right employees? 
•  Quality of existing staff 
•  Pay structure 
•  Training methods and requirements 
•  Who does which tasks? 
•  Do you have schedules and written procedures prepared? 
•  Have you drafted job descriptions for employees? If not, take time to write some. 

They really help internal communications with employees. 

•  For certain functions, will you use contract workers in addition to employees? 

Inventory 

•  What kind of inventory will you keep: raw materials, supplies, finished goods? 
•  Average value in stock (i.e., what is your inventory investment)? 
•  Rate of turnover and how this compares to the industry averages? 
•  Seasonal buildups? 
•  Lead-time for ordering? 

Suppliers 
Identify key suppliers: 

•  Names and addresses 
•  Type and amount of inventory furnished 
•  Credit and delivery policies 
•  History and reliability 

1.  Should you have more than one supplier for critical items (as a backup)? 
2.  Do you expect shortages or short-term delivery problems? 
3.  Are  supply  costs  steady  or  fluctuating?  If  fluctuating,  how  would  you  deal  with 

 

 

changing costs? 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

Page 18 

Credit Policies 

•  Do you plan to sell on credit? 
•  Do you really need to sell on credit? Is it customary in your industry and expected 

by your clientele? 
If yes, what policies will you have about who gets credit and how much? 

• 
•  How will you check the creditworthiness of new applicants? 
•  What terms will you offer your customers; that is, how much credit and when is 

•  Will you offer prompt payment discounts? (Hint: Do this only if it is usual and 

•  Do you know what it will cost you to extend credit? Have you built the costs into 

payment due? 

customary in your industry.) 

your prices? 

Managing Your Accounts Receivable 

If you do extend credit, you should do an aging at least monthly to track how much of 
your  money  is  tied  up  in  credit  given  to  customers  and  to  alert  you  to  slow  payment 
problems. A receivables aging looks like the following table: 

 

Total 

Current 

30 Days 

60 Days 

90 Days 

Over 90 Days 

Accounts 
Receivable Aging 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
You will need a policy for dealing with slow-paying customers: 

•  When do you make a phone call? 
•  When do you send a letter? 
•  When do you get your attorney to threaten? 

 

 
 

Managing Your Accounts Payable 

You should also age your accounts payable, what you owe to your suppliers. This helps 
you plan whom to pay and when. Paying too early depletes your cash, but paying late 
can cost you valuable discounts and can damage your credit. (Hint: If you know you will 
be late making a payment, call the creditor before the due date.) 

Do your proposed vendors offer prompt payment discounts? 

 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

Page 19 

 

A payables aging looks like the following table. 

 

Total  

Current 

30 Days 

60 Days 

90 Days 

Over 90 Days 

Accounts Payable 
Aging 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 20 

Management and Organization 

Who  will  manage  the  business  on  a  day-to-day  basis?  What  experience  does  that 
person bring to the business? What special or distinctive competencies? Is there a plan 
for continuation of the business if this person is lost or incapacitated? 

If  you’ll  have  more  than  10  employees,  create  an  organizational  chart  showing  the 
management hierarchy and who is responsible for key functions. 

Include position descriptions for key employees. If you are seeking loans or investors, 
include resumes of owners and key employees. 
Professional and Advisory Support 
 
List the following: 

•  Board of directors 
•  Management advisory board 
•  Attorney 
•  Accountant 
• 
•  Banker 
•  Bookkeeper 
•  Consultant or consultants 
•  Mentors and key advisors 

Insurance agent 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 21 

Personal Financial Statement 

Include personal financial statements for each owner and major stockholder, showing 
assets  and  liabilities  held  outside  the  business  and  personal  net  worth.  Owners  will 
often have to draw on personal assets to finance the business, and these statements 
will show what is available. Bankers and investors usually want this information as well. 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 22 

Startup Expenses and Capitalization 

You will have many startup expenses before you even begin operating your business. 
It’s important to estimate these expenses accurately and then to plan where you will get 
sufficient  capital.  This  is  a  research  project,  and  the  more  thorough  your  research 
efforts,  the  less  chance  that  you  will  leave  out  important  expenses  or  underestimate 
them. 

Even with the best of research, however, opening a new business has a way of costing 
more  than  you  anticipate.  There  are  two  ways  to  make  allowances  for  surprise 
expenses. The first is to add a little “padding” to each item in the budget. The problem 
with that approach, however, is that it destroys the accuracy of your carefully wrought 
plan.  The  second  approach  is  to  add  a  separate  line  item,  called  contingencies,  to 
account for the unforeseeable. This is the approach we recommend. 

Talk to others who have started similar businesses to get a good idea of how much to 
allow  for  contingencies.  If  you  cannot  get  good  information,  we  recommend  a  rule  of 
thumb that contingencies should equal at least 20 percent of the total of all other start-
up expenses. 

Explain your research and how you arrived at your forecasts of expenses. Give sources, 
amounts,  and  terms  of  proposed  loans.  Also  explain  in  detail  how  much  will  be 
contributed by each investor and what percent ownership each will have. 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 23 

Financial Plan 

The  financial  plan  consists  of  a  12-month  profit  and  loss  projection,  a  four-year  profit 
and loss projection (optional), a cash-flow projection, a projected balance sheet, and a 
break-even  calculation.  Together  they  constitute  a  reasonable  estimate  of  your 
company's financial future. More important, the process of thinking through the financial 
plan will improve your insight into the inner financial workings of your company. 
12-Month Profit and Loss Projection 
Many  business  owners  think  of  the  12-month  profit  and  loss  projection  as  the 
centerpiece of their plan. This is where  you put it all together in numbers and get an 
idea of what it will take to make a profit and be successful. 

Your sales projections will come from a sales forecast in which you forecast sales, cost 
of goods sold, expenses, and profit month-by-month for one year. 

Profit  projections  should  be  accompanied  by  a  narrative  explaining  the  major 
assumptions used to estimate company income and expenses. 

Research  Notes:  Keep  careful  notes  on  your  research  and  assumptions,  so  that  you 
can explain them later if necessary, and also so that you can go back to your sources 
when it’s time to revise your plan. 
Four-Year Profit Projection (Optional) 
The  12-month  projection  is  the  heart  of  your  financial  plan.  The  Four-Year  Profit 
projection is for those who want to carry their forecasts beyond the first year.  

Of course, keep notes of your key assumptions, especially about things that you expect 
will change dramatically after the first year. 
Projected Cash Flow 
If  the  profit  projection  is  the  heart  of  your  business  plan,  cash  flow  is  the  blood. 
Businesses fail because they cannot pay their bills. Every part of your business plan is 
important, but none of it means a thing if you run out of cash. 

The point of this worksheet is to plan how much you need before startup, for preliminary 
expenses, operating expenses, and reserves. You should keep updating it and using it 
afterward. It will enable you to foresee shortages in time to do something about them—
perhaps  cut  expenses,  or  perhaps  negotiate  a  loan.  But  foremost,  you  shouldn’t  be 
taken by surprise. 

There is no great trick to preparing it:  The cash-flow projection is just a forward look at 
your checking account. 

Page 24 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

For each item, determine when you actually expect to receive cash (for sales) or when 
you will actually have to write a check (for expense items). 

You should track essential operating data, which is not necessarily part of cash flow but 
allows  you  to  track  items  that  have  a  heavy  impact  on  cash  flow,  such  as  sales  and 
inventory purchases. 

You should also track cash outlays prior to opening in a pre-startup column. You should 
have already researched those for your startup expenses plan. 

Your cash flow will show you whether your working capital is adequate. Clearly, if your 
projected  cash  balance  ever  goes  negative,  you  will  need  more  start-up  capital.  This 
plan will also predict just when and how much you will need to borrow. 

Explain your major assumptions, especially those that make the cash flow differ from 
the Profit and Loss Projection. For example, if you make a sale in month one, when do 
you  actually  collect  the  cash?  When  you  buy  inventory  or  materials,  do  you  pay  in 
advance, upon delivery, or much later? How will this affect cash flow? 

Are some expenses payable in advance? When? 

Are there irregular expenses, such as quarterly tax payments, maintenance and repairs, 
or seasonal inventory buildup, that should be budgeted? 

Loan payments, equipment purchases, and owner's draws usually do not show on profit 
and loss statements but definitely do take cash out. Be sure to include them. 

And of course, depreciation does not appear in the cash flow at all because you never 
write a check for it. 
Opening Day Balance Sheet 
A balance sheet is one of the fundamental financial reports that any business needs for 
reporting and financial management.  A balance sheet shows what items of value are 
held  by  the  company  (assets),  and  what  its  debts  are  (liabilities).  When  liabilities  are 
subtracted from assets, the remainder is owners’ equity. 

Use  a  startup  expenses  and  capitalization  spreadsheet  as  a  guide  to  preparing  a 
balance sheet as of opening day. Then detail how you calculated the account balances 
on your opening day balance sheet. 

Optional:  Some people want to add a projected balance sheet showing the estimated 
financial position of the company at the end of the first year. This is especially useful 
when selling your proposal to investors. 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 25 

Break-Even Analysis 
A break-even analysis predicts the sales volume, at a given price, required to recover 
total costs. In other words, it’s the sales level that is the dividing line between operating 
at a loss and operating at a profit. 

 

Expressed as a formula, break-even is: 

  

Breakeven sales     =    

Fixed costs 

1- Variable costs 

 

  

  

  

 

(Where  fixed  costs  are  expressed  in  dollars,  but  variable  costs  are  expressed  as  a 
percent of total sales.) 

Include all assumptions upon which your break-even calculation is based. 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 26 

Appendices 

 
Include details and studies used in your business plan; for example: 
 

Industry studies 

•  Brochures and advertising materials 
• 
•  Blueprints and plans 
•  Maps and photos of location 
•  Magazine or other articles 
•  Detailed lists of equipment owned or to be purchased 
•  Copies of leases and contracts 
•  Letters of support from future customers 
•  Any other materials needed to support the assumptions in this plan 
•  Market research studies 
•  List of assets available as collateral for a loan 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 27 

Refining the Plan 

The  generic  business  plan  presented  above  should  be  modified  to  suit  your  specific 
type of business and the audience for which the plan is written. 
For Raising Capital 
 
For Bankers 
 

•  Bankers  want  assurance  of  orderly  repayment.  If  you  intend  using  this  plan  to 

present to lenders, include: 

o  Amount of loan 
o  How the funds will be used 
o  What this will accomplish—how will it make the business stronger? 
o  Requested repayment terms (number of years to repay). You will probably 
not  have  much  negotiating  room  on  interest  rate  but  may  be  able  to 
negotiate a longer repayment term, which will help cash flow. 

o  Collateral offered, and a list of all existing liens against collateral 

 
For Investors 
 

• 

Investors have a different perspective. They are looking for dramatic growth, and 
they expect to share in the rewards: 

growth. 

o  Funds needed short-term 
o  Funds needed in two to five years 
o  How  the  company  will  use  the  funds,  and  what  this  will  accomplish  for 
o  Estimated return on investment 
o  Exit strategy for investors (buyback, sale, or IPO) 
o  Percent of ownership that you will give up to investors 
o  Milestones or conditions that you will accept 
o  Financial reporting to be provided 
o 

Involvement of investors on the board or in management 

 
For Type of Business 
 
Manufacturing 
 

•  Planned production levels 
•  Anticipated levels of direct production costs and indirect (overhead) costs—how 

do these compare to industry averages (if available)? 

•  Prices per product line 
•  Gross profit margin, overall and for each product line 

Page 28 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

•  Production/capacity limits of planned physical plant 
•  Production/capacity limits of equipment 
•  Purchasing and inventory management procedures 
•  New products under development or anticipated to come online after startup 

 
Service Businesses 
 

•  Service businesses sell intangible products. They are usually more flexible than 
other types of businesses, but they also have higher labor costs and generally 
very little in fixed assets. 

•  What are the key competitive factors in this industry? 
•  Your prices 
•  Methods used to set prices 
•  System of production management 
•  Quality control procedures. Standard or accepted industry quality standards. 
•  How will you measure labor productivity? 
•  Percent  of  work  subcontracted  to  other  firms.  Will  you  make  a  profit  on 

subcontracting? 

•  Credit, payment, and collections policies and procedures 
•  Strategy for keeping client base 

 
High Technology Companies 
 

•  Economic outlook for the industry 
•  Will the company have information systems in place to manage rapidly changing 

prices, costs, and markets? 

•  Will you be on the cutting edge with your products and services? 
•  What is the status of research and development? And what is required to: 

•  How does the company: 

o  Bring product/service to market? 
o  Keep the company competitive? 
o  Protect intellectual property? 
o  Avoid technological obsolescence? 
o  Supply necessary capital? 
o  Retain key personnel? 

 
High-tech  companies  sometimes  have  to  operate  for  a  long  time  without  profits  and 
sometimes even without sales. If this fits your situation, a banker probably will not want 
to lend to you. Venture capitalists may invest, but your story must be very good. You 
must  do  longer-term  financial  forecasts  to  show  when  profit  take-off  is  expected  to 
occur. And your assumptions must be well documented and well argued. 

Page 29 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

 
Retail Business 
 

•  Company image 
•  Pricing: 

image. 

• 

Inventory: 

o  Explain markup policies. 
o  Prices should be profitable, competitive, and in accordance with company 

o  Selection and price should be consistent with company image. 
o 

Inventory  level:  Find  industry  average  numbers  for  annual  inventory 
turnover  rate  (available  in  RMA  book).  Multiply  your  initial  inventory 
investment  by  the  average  turnover  rate.  The  result  should  be  at  least 
equal to your projected first year's cost of goods sold. If it is not, you may 
not have enough budgeted for startup inventory. 

•  Customer  service  policies:  These  should  be  competitive  and  in  accord  with 

company image. 

•  Location:  Does  it  give  the  exposure  that  you  need?  Is  it  convenient  for 

customers? Is it consistent with company image? 

•  Promotion: Methods used, cost. Does it project a consistent company image? 
•  Credit: Do you extend credit to customers? If yes, do you really need to, and do 

you factor the cost into prices? 

NCCCS ‐ SBCN 

 

Page 30 

 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Sales
Profit  Weighted
Price  COGS Contribution  Margin Profit Marg.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
BREAKEVEN POINT CALCULATION 
  
STEP 1:  Determine total overhead costs. 
 
Rent 
 
Electricity 
Telephone 
 
 
Water /Sewer 
 
Advertising 
Salaries 
 
 
Owner's Draw 
 
Postage/Shipping 
 
Office Supplies 
Loan Payment 
 
 
Insurance 
 
Miscellaneous 
Other 
 
Total Overhead 
 
  
STEP 2:  Determine average profit margin for products/services. 
 
Products/Services 
  
  
  
  
  
  
(Must equal 100%) 
  
  
  
STEP 3:  Determine monthly break-even in dollars. 
  
 

 
Total Overhead 

% of 
Sales 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
divided by Average Profit Margin  
 
 

= BREAKEVEN 

 

 
  
STEP 4:  Determine break-even point by week, day, hour, and unit.  
  
Avg Sales per Customer 
Days Open Per Week 
Hours Open Per Day 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Average profit margin:   
 
Average sales per customer:   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 es:

 me:

 mits

LES
 

 ment

Company Na
BEGINNING CASH 
CASH IN: 
SA
Loan 
TOTAL CASH IN  
CASH OUT: 
Startup Costs: 
Equip
Fixt
 
ures
Fees\Per
Initial inventory 
Operating Expens
Office sup
plies
 
Loan Payment 
 
sing
Adverti
 nce
Insura
 one
Teleph
Electr
 
icity
Water & Se
Sal
aries
 
Payroll ta
Owner's d
Property Ta
Monthly Loan Payment 
TOTAL CASH OUT  
CASH FLOW 
ENDING CASH 
 mer
Avg sale/custo
Customers/m
onth
 
Loan interest rate 
Monthly Per
iods
 
Loan Repayment 
 

 
xes
 
raw
xes
 

 wer

START

UP
 
   
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

